Biomimetic Design and Kinematic Analysis of a
Rope-driven Soft Robotic Arm
1stRuile Ma
School of Electrical and Information Engineering
Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou, China
2521394302@qq.com2ndJinzhu Peng∗
School of Electrical and Information Engineering
Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou, China
jzpeng@zzu.edu.cn
3rdPengfei Yu
School of Electrical and Information Engineering
Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou, China
2816148757@qq.com4thNan Zhao
Department of Artificial Intelligence Business
Zhengzhou JD Cloud Computing Co., Ltd.
Zhengzhou, China
zhaonan8@jd.com
Abstract —Soft robotic arms have strong adaptability and
their broad application prospects have been attracted increasing
attention. In this paper, the structure of a kind of rope-driven
soft robotic arm is designed based on the biological character-
istics, and its kinematic model is established based on constant
curvature analysis. The spatial posture and end position of the
soft robotic arm are obtained through numerical simulations,
and the results reveal the reachable workspace of the designed
soft robotic arm. In addition, based on the inverse kinematics
of soft robotic arm, the circular trajectory planning is analyzed
and discussed. The experimental results of spatial posture and
trajectory planning are consistent with the simulation results,
which indicates that the designed soft robotic arm structure is
reasonable and the kinematic analysis is correct.
Keywords —soft robotic arm, biomimetic design, kinematic anal-
ysis, circular trajectory planning
I. I NTRODUCTION
Most of the traditional rigid robotic arms are assembled
by components with certain hardness, which have low safety
and poor movement flexibility when contacting with people
and fragile objects. Especially in the face of unstructured
complex environments, traditional robotic arms are difficult
to efficiently complete tasks due to their rigid structure.
The development of bionics has brought inspiration to the
emergence of soft robotic arms. The difference between soft
robotic arms and conventional robotic arms is that their partial
structures are made of soft materials [1]. Soft robotic arms
can flexibly change their shapes in complex environments and
complete some tasks that traditional rigid robotic arms cannot
accomplish.
According to different driving modes, soft robotic arms
can be divided into gas-driven, shape memory alloy-driven,
electroactive polymer-driven, rope-driven, and so on [2]. The
This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (62273311, 61773351), and in part by Henan Provincial Science
Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars (242300421051), and in part
by Zhengzhou JD Cloud Computing Co., Ltd.pneumatic soft robotic arms have high adaptability, but there
are also many drawbacks, sucn as low effective load capacity,
large energy consumption, complex gas transmission system,
slow response speed, and high production standard [3]. Al-
though the full body weight of the robotic arms driven by
electroactive polymer and shape memory alloy is light, the
output force generated is small. In addition, higher power
requirements and specific temperature changes are required,
and the shape changes are limited [4,5]. The rope-driven
soft robotic arms have high research value due to structural
stability, operability and positioning accuracy, but it is difficult
to wrap larger objects because of the length of rope [6].
Soft materials give the soft robotic arms excellent flexibility
and security, but they also bring great difficulties to theoretical
analysis, especially modeling. At present, the main modeling
methods of soft robotic arms include finite element modeling,
constant curvature modeling, variable curvature modeling, and
data-driven modeling. The finite element modeling has good
universality, but its cost is high and the process is complex [7].
The method of constant curvature modeling is simple, compu-
tationally efficient, and more suitable to model-based control
[8]. Currently, it is the most widely used, but its accuracy is
relatively low. Although the accuracy of the variable curvature
modeling method has improved, its calculation is complicated,
which is not applicable for model-based control [9]. The data-
driven modeling has strong applicability, but data collection
and training are difficult [10].
The main work of this article is as follows: Firstly, the
structure of a kind of rope-driven soft robotic arm is designed
by learning biological features, and the ingenious and novel
biomimetic design enables the soft robotic arm to have multi-
ple working modes, stronger adaptability, and higher stability.
Secondly, based on the assumption of constant curvature,
kinematic analysis is conducted on the soft robotic arm to
achieve precise posture control. Thirdly, simulations of spatial
posture and workspace are carried out, and experiments are
209
979-8-3503-5030-2/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE2024 9th International Conference on Automation, Control and Robotics Engineering (CACRE) | 979-8-3503-5030-2/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CACRE62362.2024.10635043

conducted on the actual prototype. The consistency between
simulation results and experimental results verifies the ratio-
nality of the structural design and the effectiveness of forward
kinematics. Finally, the circular trajectory planning is analyzed
and discussed based on inverse kinematics, which verifies the
correctness of inverse kinematics.
II. B IOMIMETIC DESIGN AND MANUFACTURE
Through observation, the elephant’s trunk is very flexible, it
can easily roll up heavy objects, and the liquid suction exper-
iment shown in Fig. 1 demonstrates that the elephant’s trunk
can absorb different objects [11]. Introducing this versatility
into the design of a robotic arm can make it more adaptable
and diverse in different scenarios and tasks. In addition, the
lamellae on gecko’s toes can enhance contact adaptation and
reduce contact impacts [12]. The similar lamellae on the
surface of a robotic arm can enhance the contact adaptability,
and improve its stability when wrapping objects. As shown
in Fig. 1, we produce an actual prototype of a biomimetic
rope-driven soft robotic arm based on the designed 3D model
by the idea of the elephant’s trunk and the lamellae on the
gecko’s toes.
To achieve stable structure, strong operability, and high
positioning accuracy, we design a rope-driven soft robotic arm.
The arm body is a hollow structure made of silicone, and
the spring skeleton set in the cavity is similar to the longi-
tudinal muscles of the elephant’s trunk, providing structural
support and deformation ability to adapt to different working
conditions. The air pipe passes through the inner cavity of
the spring skeleton, connecting the air pump and the suction
cup at the end of the arm. When it is difficult to wrap due
to the rope length limitation, the suction cup functions as
an elephant’s nostril to adsorb objects, compensating for the
shortcomings of the rope-driven method. The lamellae on the
surface of the arm can improve the contact adaptability, adapt
to different shapes of object surfaces, and improve stability
and controllability when wrapping objects. The four fishing
lines distributed evenly in the arm body, are pulled by four
servos assembled on the base of the robotic arm to deflect
and bend the arm body.
To sum up, the soft robotic arm can achieve two func-
tions of wrapping and adsorbing objects, with high flexibility
and adaptability. Compared with other robotic arms, the soft
robotic arm can adapt to unstructured complex environments
and complete diverse tasks more efficiently.
III. K INEMATIC ANALYSIS
According to experimental observations, it can be concluded
that the curvature of each part of the arm during bending is
basically consistent, indicating that the bending shape of the
robotic arm is approximately circular arc. Becasue the robotic
arm only perform simple movements, we can use constant
curvature modeling to analyze reasonably and simplify cal-
culations. We propose three assumptions based on the above
observation.
Elephant’s trunk
Gecko’s toes
Overall model
 Arm body Cutaway 
Actual prototype
3D model of the soft robotic armActual prototype of the soft robotic arm
Drive 
device
Elephant’s trunk and gecko’s toesWrapping
Adsorbing
LamellaeFig. 1. Biomimetic desigh and manufacture of the soft robotic arm.
Assumption1 : The bending curvature of the arm body is a
constant.
Assumption2 : Neglecting the influence of gravity on the
bending of the arm body.
Assumption3 : The shape of the arm body is simplified to a
cylinder.
Define three bending parameters ( ϕ θ r ) based on the above
assumptions [13], ϕis the deflection angle between the plane
where the arm body is located and the xoz plane, θis the
central angle, and rrepresents the bending radius.
x
y
zOr
z1x1
y1O1θ
 φ
 
(a) Schematic diagram
x
y
z
z1x1
y1O
O11
234φ
 θ
 r (b) Simplified diagram
x
yO 1
234
φ R
r
(c) Top view
θ
 
1234r O
O1 z (d) Side view
Fig. 2. Kinematic analysis of constant curvature.
The change of fishing line’s length can be expressed as,
li=L−qi (1)
where Lis the original length of each fishing line, qiandli,
i= 1,2,3,4are changing length and current length of each
fishing line in the arm body. By analyzing, we can get,


l=1
44P
i=1li
q=1
44P
i=1qi(2)
210

where qandlrepresent the changing length and current length
of the central arc of the arm.
From Fig. 2 (c) and (d), the current length of each fishing
line can be represented by bending parameters as,


l1=θ(r−Rcosϕ)
l2=θ(r−Rsinϕ)
l3=θ(r+Rcosϕ)
l4=θ(r+Rsinϕ)(3)
where Rrepresents the cross section radius of the arm body.
According to (1), (2), and (3), bending parameters can be
expressed as,
ϕ= arctanq4−q2
q3−q1(4)
θ=q
(q3−q1)2+ (q4−q2)2
2R(5)
r=2(L−q)Rq
(q3−q1)2+ (q4−q2)2(6)
Changing length of each fishing line in the arm body can
be represented as,
qi=ξiRd (7)
where ξiandRdrepresent the rotation angle and radius of
servo disk, respectively. Then, by substituting (7) into (4), (5)
and (6), bending parameters can be expressed as,
ϕ= arctanξ4−ξ2
ξ3−ξ1(8)
θ=q
(ξ3−ξ1)2+ (ξ4−ξ2)2
2R(9)
r=2(L−q)Rq
(ξ3−ξ1)2+ (ξ4−ξ2)2(10)
where q=1
4Rd4P
i=1ξi, and the forward kinematics is com-
pleted through the above steps.
The motion process of the arm body can be regarded as
two steps: the soft robotic arm firstly rotates angle θaround
the y-axis and then rotates angle ϕaround the z-axis [14].
The homogeneous transformation matrix from the origin of
the base coordinate system to the origin of the end coordinate
system can be obtained according to the two-step motion
transformation as,
T=Rz(ϕ) 0
0 1Ry(θ)p
0 1
=
cosϕcosθ−sinϕcosϕsinθlcosϕ(1−cosθ)
θ
sinϕcosθcosϕ sinϕsinθlsinϕ(1−cosθ)
θ
−sinθ 0 cos θlsinθ
θ
0 0 0 1

(11)The pose matrix of the endpoint can be expressed as,
Tp=
αxβxγxpx
αyβyγypy
αzβzγzpz
0 0 0 1
(12)
where p(px, py, pz)represents the endpoint’s coordinate,
(αx, αy, αz)T,(βx, βy, βz)T, and (γx, γy, γz)Trepresent the
direction vector of the axis of the endpoint coordinate system
in the base coordinate system, respectively.
LetTp=T, we have,
ϕ= arctan(py
px) (13)
θ= 2 arctan(py
pzsinϕ) (14)
r=pz
sinθ(15)
By substituting (13), (14) and (15) into (1), (3) and (7), the
rotation angle of the servo disk can be obtained according to
the coordinates of the endpoint or spatical posture, completing
the analysis of the inverse kinematics.
Rotation angles
of four servos
Forward 
kinematics
Simulation of 
space postureExperiment of 
space postureSimulation of 
workspaceCircular trajectory 
points
Inverse 
kinematics
Rotation angles
of four servos
Simulation of 
circular trajectoryExperiment of 
circular trajectory
 Highly 
consistent?space posture
 parameters
Yes No
Forward kinematics 
is correctForward kinematics 
is wrongCompare the results with 
the theoretical circle
 Highly 
consistent?Yes No
Inverse kinematics 
is correctInverse kinematics 
is wrong
Fig. 3. Kinematic correctness verification flow chart.
As shown in Fig. 3, the subsequent content of this ar-
ticle will validate the correctness of the kinematic analysis
mentioned above. Correct kinematic analysis is crucial for
achieving precise control and highly efficient motion of the
soft robotic arm.
IV. V ERIFICATION OF FORWARD KINEMATICS
In this part, we verify the correctness of forward kinematic
analysis by comparing the simulation and experimental spatial
postures. Firstly, we draw the spatial postures of the arm
through simulation under different inputs. Subsequently, the
Monte Carlo method is employed to compute the precise
spatial position of the endpoint, and the workspace of the
arm can be obtained. Finally, we conduct experiments on the
actual prototype and compare the experimental results with
simulation results under the same inputs.
211

A. Simulation of spatial posture
Because the shape of the arm body is simplified to a
cylinder, the shape of the central axis and the outline of
the column core are shown only during the simulation. The
spatial postures can be obtained when the inputs of four servos
are given. Some spatial posture simulation results are shown
in Fig. 4, which indicate excellent bending performance. In
addition, the different spatial postures can make the robotic
arm adapt to various environments.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 4. Some simulation results of spatial posture.
B. Simulation of workspace
A commonly employed method for simulating and ana-
lyzing the workspace of robotic arms is the Monte Carlo
method. Based on the principle of random sampling, it can
randomly select points in the joint activity space of the robotic
arm, and calculate the coordinate values corresponding to the
random points through simulation. When the sampled data is
sufficient, the workspace of the robotic arm can be obtained.
It is specified that the variation range of the four servos is
[-90°, 90°], and 125000 points are randomly generated within
this range. The simulation result of the workspace is shown
in Fig. 5.
(a) Workspace simulation result
 (b) Range of coordinates at the endpoints
Fig. 5. Workspace simulation of the soft robotic arm.
C. Experiment of spatial posture
By inputting the rotation angles of the four servos, we can
control the deflection and bending of the soft robotic arm. The
vertical projection of the end is marked on a horizontal grid
coordinate paper. Based on the projection mark, the xand
ycoordinates of the end are obtained for each posture. The
vertical distance between the endpoint center and the base
point Ois measured as the zcoordinate. Some spatial posture
experiment results are shown in Fig. 6, with each spatialposture corresponding to the simulation results in Fig. 4.
The simulation and experimental results are highly consistent,
suggesting the rationality of the structural design and forward
kinematics.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 6. Some experimental results of spatial posture.
(a) Comparison of deflection angle ϕ
 (b) Comparison of central angle θ
(c) Comparison of endpoint position
 (d) Distance of endpoint position
Fig. 7. Comparison of spatial posture between simulation and experiment.
We conduct 34 spatial posture simulations and the corre-
sponding experiments are carried out on the actual prototype.
Fig. 7 (a), (b), and (c) show the comparison of deflection angle
ϕ, central angle θand endpoint position, respectively. And
Fig. 7 (d) shows the distance of endpoint position between
the simulation and experiment. It can be observed that the
experimental data of the arm closely match the simulation
data, further verifying the applicability of the model.
Kinematics is grounded on the assumption that the arm body
bends with constant curvature. In addition, installation errors
in actual prototype are caused, and there is motion friction dur-
ing experiments. So there inevitably exist differences between
the simulation and experimental results. Apart from minor data
fluctuations, the error is in a reasonable range.
V. V ERIFICATION OF INVERSE KINEMATICS
In this part, we perform circular trajectory planning to
validate the correctness of inverse kinematic analysis. Firstly,
determine the position and size of the theoretical circle based
on the workspace, and select the circular trajectory points from
the theoretical circle. Then, use inverse kinematics to obtain
the corresponding inputs for each circular trajectory point.
Finally, the simulation and experimental circular trajectories
are obtained by using the above data, and compared with
the theoretical circle to validate the rationality of inverse
kinematics.
212

Within the workspace range shown in Fig. 5, we select some
points to form an approximate circle, the spatial positions of
the 12 points are shown as,
ϕ=t·π/6(t= 1,2,· · ·,12)
x= 85.75 cos ϕ, y= 85.75 sin ϕ, z= 49.6(16)
Fig. 8. Simulation postures corresponding to circular trajectory points.
As shown in Fig. 8, twelve points on a circle with the radius
of 85.75mm are selected as the positions of the endpoints
of the soft robotic arm. The 12 designated points distribute
uniformly on a circle that is parallel to the xoy plane.
Through inverse kinematics calculation, the 12 sets of input
angles of the servos can be obtained. The obtained data are
input into the actual prototype to generate a series of spatial
postures. Fig. 9 shows experimental postures corresponding to
circular trajectory points.
(a) 12 discrete postures
 (b) Composition diagram
Fig. 9. Experimental postures corresponding to circular trajectory points.
(a) Comparison of the results
 (b) Top view
Fig. 10. Comparison of theoretical circle with simulation and experimental
results.
As shown in Fig. 10, the simulation and experimental
polygonal trajectories are both approximate to theoreticalcircular trajectory. The result validates the applicability of
inverse kinematics.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a rope-driven soft robotic arm is designed
based on biological characteristics, and it can adapt to different
working environments by adjusting its posture and can also
realize two functions of wrapping and adsorbing objects, and
the arm has a high degree of flexibility and adaptability.
The kinematic analysis is carried out based on the constant
curvature assumption. In addition, on the basis of discrete
inputs, the experimental results and simulation results are
highly consistent, which verifies the rationality of the structural
design and the forward kinematic model. Finally, the applica-
bility of inverse kinematics is proved through the experiment
of circular trajectory. Further research on control algorithms
and optimization of structural parameters will be conducted to
improve the motion performance of the soft robotic arm.
