Received March 20, 2019, accepted May 1, 2019, date of publication May 7, 2019, date of current version May 31, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2019.2915363
Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic
Arms Based on Carbon Fiber Reinforced
Plastic and Aluminum Alloy
HAIBIN YIN
 , JING LIU, AND FENG YANG
Key Laboratory of Hubei Province for Digital Manufacture, School of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China
Corresponding author: Haibin Yin (chinaliuyin@whut.edu.cn)
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 51575409 and Grant 91848102.
ABSTRACT Some light materials, such as hollow sphere composite (HSC), carbon ber reinforced plastic
(CFRP), and aluminum alloy (AA), are currently used in the design of lightweight robotic arms. However,
the high cost limit the use of HSC, the CFRP has a relatively low cost but poor processing property, and
the AA has good processing property but relatively high density. To make up respective shortcomings, this
study focuses on the design issues of lightweight robotic arms by using two kinds of materials. Based on the
CFRP and AA, a hybrid structure design approach is proposed to minimize the total mass of the lightweight
robotic arms with CFRP/AA hybrid structure. To accomplish the objective, structural dimensions and layer
parameters in hybrid structures are parameterized as design variables subject to the strength, stiffness, and
dynamic constraints. Moreover, the bonding strength of the interaction surfaces between CFRP and AA parts
is also considered on the basis of the cohesive zone model (CZM). In optimization design, the ABAQUS and
elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) in modeFRONTIER utilizing the Python script
are respectively employed for the structural analyses and iteration calculation. Finally, a design example and
an experimental prototype are provided to validate the proposed method and compare with the previous AA
prototype in mass with a reduction of 24.32%.
INDEX TERMS Lightweight robotic arm, hybrid structure, optimization design, carbon ber reinforced
plastic, aluminum alloy.
I. INTRODUCTION
Under the requirements of energy-efciency and productiv-
ity, lightweight robotic arms are increasingly employed in the
elds of industry, agriculture, service, and space exploration.
The lightweight robotic arm denotes that it is required to
reduce the weight of the arms satisfying specic conditions.
To realize the lightweight design of robotic arms, there are
three ways: drivetrain design for high torque density, structure
optimization for fewer materials and use of light materials.
Drivetrains used as actuators in the robotic arm account
for a large proportion of the total mass, so they have a
lot of potential for the improvement of torque density of
these actuators. Smart materials, which are popularly used
as actuator of soft robot, possess high torque density, such
as dielectric elastomeric actuators (DEA) [1], electro active
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Huaqing Li.polymer (EAP) [2], and shape memory alloy (SMA) [3].
However, these articial muscles, which can contribute
lightweight or adaptability, produce poor dynamic per-
formance and positioning accuracy, and some drawbacks
limiting their utility in specic cases. In the need of
good dynamic performance and positioning accuracy of
the lightweight robotic arm, traditional drivetrains are still
the most common for lightweight design by increasing its
torque density. Fujishima et al. introduced an optimiza-
tion method to quickly design a permanent synchronous
motor for high torque density [4]. Jing et al. proposed
a structural design method for brushless DC motor in
robotic joint [5]. Sulaiman et al. rstly studied the torque
of a dual excitation switch-ux (DESF) motor, and then
adopted a deterministic approach to optimize DESF motor's
parameters and improve its torque density for target per-
formances [6]. However, these studies were implemented
to increase the torque density of motors, but disregarding
649322169-3536 
2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.VOLUME 7, 2019
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
the combination with gears or structure of robotic arm.
Pettersson and Ölvander proposed a drivetrain optimiza-
tion for nding the trade-offs between lifetime, properties
and cost of industrial robots [7]. Zhou et al. presented
an integrated optimization method to design a lightweight
anthropomorphic arm, which is optimized based on the drive-
trains selected from commercial catalog [8]. Nevertheless, the
growth on the torque density of drivetrains is limited under the
current technology conditions, and more the lightweight opti-
mization of drivetrain is dependent on the structural param-
eters. Therefore, the structural optimization is the main way
for lightweight robotic arms when the types or technologies
of drivetrains are determined.
Structural optimization can reduce the unwanted material
subject to the specic conditions. Shiakolas et al. discussed
optimum robot design to minimize the torque required for
the motion subject to defection and physical constraints with
the design variables being the structural dimensions [9].
Kim et al. presented a topology optimization method for the
design of lightweight serial robots and performed the topol-
ogy optimization of a robot structure by dividing the prob-
lem into part-level optimization [10]. Structural optimization
could reduce the weight of structure, but it could also lead the
system to be prone to exible vibration. Hence, the dynamic
compensation for stiffness is required to contribute the grade
of lightweight by means of feedback control [11] and tra-
jectory planning [12]. Fonseca and Bainum utilized semi-
analytical approach to compute the sensitivity with respect
to design parameters, and performed an integrated struc-
tural/control optimization of a large space structure with a
robot arm for obtaining the minimum weight and optimal
dynamic performance [13]. Lee et al. optimized the kinematic
variables of a welding robot for considering a mass reduction,
and the desired trajectory of the welding robot was obtained
through two steps of coarse and ne searching [14]. Both
the structural optimization and dynamic compensation for
stiffness aim at enhancing the stiffness-to-mass ratio from
macro-scale level. While light materials with larger stiffness-
to-mass ratio could attain lighter structure from micro-scale
level.
With development of material technique, there have
been serval light materials with high stiffness and low
density. Cheng et al. designed a fully plastic micro
robot (FPMR) through the combination of the Cross-linked
liquid-crystalline polymers and polyethylene lms [15]. Sim-
ilarly, exible plastic was applied into the fabrication of
underwater robot (UWR) to reduce its weight and the force
generated by the differential pressure between inside and
outside of the robot [16]. The plastic materials used in
both the FPMR and UWR have high stiffness-to-mass ratio,
but its absolute strength and stiffness are low. Hagenah
et al. designed and manufactured the anges of the robotic
arms with titanium and joint housing with nanocrystalline
aluminum alloy, which can attain lighter structure than
the conventional casting counterpart [17]. Baumeister and
Klaeger reported the application of hollow-sphere-composite(HSC) [18] and used it to fabricate the SCARA robot
arm, which is demonstrated with good static and dynamic
properties compared with AA arm [19]. These abovemen-
tioned materials have high stiffness-to-mass ratio and abso-
lute strength, but high cost results in a barrier for wide
usage in robotic arms. Some notable lightweight robotic
arms, such as UR [20] and KUKA [21], were made of
low-cost AA materials. In addition, Fiber reinforced plas-
tic (FRP) possess not only relative low cost but also the high
stiffness-to-mass ratio, so it is widely used in the design
of lightweight structure. Liao et al. analyzed the optimal
geometry and material fabrication parameters of lightweight
arm with FRP [22]. Lee et al. introduced two kinds of robotic
wrist blocks with carbon FRP (CFRP) and glass FRP (GFRP)
to compare their stiffness [23]. Yoo et al. designed a sub-
sea walking robot with CFRP to protect the robot from
corroding and reduce its weight in contrast with the con-
ventional metallic robot [24]. CFRP is a kind of popular
material with good properties and widely used in lightweight
structures, however, the CFRP materials are unsuitably
used in the structure, which is complex part required con-
nect in multi-body system, due to its poor processing
property.
To avoid the ber damage caused by machining, the com-
plex pieces connecting with other parts could be fabri-
cated by metal materials with good processing property and
bonded with the CFRP structure. Mutasher et al. studied
and fabricated a hybrid shaft by winding CFRP onto an
AA tube with different winding angles and numbers of lay-
ers, and denoted that the hybrid shaft has a better bending
fatigue property when the ber placement with 45[25].
Feng et al. investigated CFRP/AA hybrid tubes by using
compression experiments and a theoretical analysis, where
formulas describing the compressive bearing capacity with
and without local buckling before yielding are proposed for
the hybrid tubes [26]. The hybrid tube is a single component
with simple shape and the corresponding researches disre-
garded the adhesive strength between both the parts with
different materials, while the complex part used in multi-
body structure is required to consider the adhesion strength.
The cohesive zone model (CZM) is generally used in the
analysis of the failure characteristics in the hybrid struc-
ture [27]. Ribeiro et al. used CZM to perform a detailed
stress analysis that enables the comparison between different
planes in the adhesive joint and values of overlap length in
the hybrid structure [28]. Jeon et al. proposed a design of
CFRP/AA hybrid upper arm for the pantograph of high-speed
trains in consideration of the failure of adhesion layer at
high temperature and its mechanical performance [29]. These
investigations involving the geometry parameters, layer num-
bers as well as the adhesive strength in the hybrid structure
are useful reference in the design of lightweight structure.
JACO is a typical lightweight robotic arm with CFRP/AA
hybrid structure [30], but the closed CFRP shell, in which its
AA actuator is completely embedded, results in difculty of
dispersing heat.
VOLUME 7, 2019 64933
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
FIGURE 1. (a) Prototype of robotic arm made of AA and (b) model of robotic arm based on CFRP/AA.
This study extends the hybrid structure method in the previ-
ous design of the 4-DOF robotic arm with AA material [31] to
improve its lightweight level and heat dissipation. The hybrid
structure design is presented as an optimization problem,
which minimizes the weight of robotic arm subject to the
constraints conditions on structural strength, stiffness and
dynamic performance, as well as adhesive strength between
AA and CFRP components. In the optimization, the structural
parameters of AA parts and the stacking sequences and layer
numbers of CFRP components are dened as design vari-
ables. The hybrid structures of robotic arm are simultaneously
optimized on the basis of NSGA-II instead of multi-level
optimization algorithm, so this design could obtain a global
optimum solution for the lightweight robotic arm. Finally,
a CFRP/AA experimental prototype is fabricated, and then
series of experiments on the lightweight feature and dynamic
characteristics of the hybrid structure prototype is measured
to compare with the AA prototype and validate the optimiza-
tion method.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND DESIGN CONDITIONS
In general, AA is a preferred material for lightweight robotic
arms considering the cost and processing. Figure 1(a) shows
an AA prototype of the 4-DOF robotic arm, which was devel-
oped for service tasks in mobile robot based on the previous
research [31]. However, the AA prototype was implemented
as a conceptual design with holes and slots to reduce the
weight of robotic arms, moreover the AA material consti-
tuting the prototype have provided low damping ratio and
limited lightweight design. Hence, a lighter material with
higher damping ratio and a streamline design with round
shape are required. To realize this target, composite material
CFRP, which is characterized by low density, high strength
and damping ratio, is an ideal alternative. CFRP is commonly
used as the structural material to build monolithic compo-
nents because it is not suitable to use the machining process
for bolt and assembly connects. However, the robotic arms
are typical multibody structures and the connecting part of
each component at joint is required to use machining process.
Therefore, a hybrid structure integrating the links made of
CFRP and the connecting part manufactured from AA is
presented to design the lightweight robotic arm.A. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Figure 1(b) depicts the model of robotic arm with hybrid
structures, which consist of the connecting parts and links.
The connecting parts include the ear plates and lining of joint
housing made of AA (ALJH), which are characterized by
complex geometrical shapes with assembly and connecting
holes. The CFRP links are built as a monolithic component
with the shell of joint housing made of CFRP (CSJH). The
hybrid structure made of both the AA and CFRP materials
show complex shape and anisotropy based on machining,
bonding and forming processes, so the lightweight design is
a challenging task. To obtain the optimal hybrid structure,
the whole robotic arm with CFRP/AA hybrid structures is
modeled and analyzed in ABAQUS, where the hybrid struc-
tures are parameterized to optimize the robotic arm in consid-
eration of the objective function as well as the working and
constraints conditions. In this optimization problem, the main
parameters of links and joint housing in the hybrid structures
are dened as the design variables, and the corresponding
constraints conditions are presented to ensure the validity of
optimal results.
B. PRECONDITION OF DESIGN
The optimization design of the lightweight robotic arm with
hybrid structures is conducted on the basis of the AA proto-
type and only the upper arm and forearm are replaced with
CFRP/AA hybrid structures. Thus, several structural param-
eters are used as the same values with the AA prototype, for
example, the lengths of links and height of base are used as
L1D319 mm, L2D251 mm, L3D130 mm, hD250 mm
as shown in Fig. 1(a). Moreover, the lengths of the upper arm
and forearm (L 1andL2) are determined by considering global
condition index (GCI) [32] parameter as 0.3125 to obtain
the optimal workspace [31]. In addition to these structural
parameters, the robotic arm with hybrid structures is actuated
by these drivetrains, which are composed of the same Maxon
motors and XBHY harmonic gears used in the AA prototype
as listed in Table 1. The AA prototype was designed by
considering the specic task conditions, and the robotic arm
with CFRP/AA hybrid structure is optimized on the basis of
the same task conditions, which are termed as the load and
trajectories.
64934 VOLUME 7, 2019
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
TABLE 1. Motors and harmonic gears used in the four joints.
FIGURE 2. Two types of trajectories in (a) ground and (b) wall
installations.
TABLE 2. Installation types and trajectories.
The kinematic and dynamic simulations of the robotic arm
are analyzed by considering a group of trajectories. As shown
in Fig. 2, the robotic arm moves along two types of trajecto-
ries in each installation, which is divided by gravity vectors
g1D[0;0; 1] and g2D[1;0;0]. Therefore, the robotic
arm is conducted in four motions totally, and these motions
are described with the starting and ending positions as listed
in Table 2. Using polynomial interpolation, these trajectories
are represented byV
qj.t/Dn
a0Ca1tCa2t2Ca3t3Ca4t4Ca5t5o
j;
jD1;2;3;4; (1)
where the six coefcients could be determined by using the
values of positions, velocities and accelerations at the starting
time t1D0 and ending time t2D3 s.
In addition, the target payload me, which is a mass point,
is given as 2 kg in this study.
C. DESCRIPTIONS OF HYBRID STRUCTURE
Figure 3 shows the principal model of the ith hybrid structure
(iD1, 2), which includes the CFRP link and the CFRP
shell of joint housing (CSJH), as well as the AA ear plate
FIGURE 3. Principal model of the ith hybrid structure (i D1;2).
and the AA lining of joint housing (ALJH). The both types of
parts are connected by bonding or packing prepreg process.
To fasten the connection, The ALJH was fabricated with some
technology grooves before packing and forming with CFRP,
and the AA ear plate was bonded with the CFRP link by using
a bonding layer.
III. OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM AND METHOD
Based on the abovementioned design conditions and descrip-
tions of hybrid structure, a hybrid structure design of the
lightweight robotic arm are proposed in this section. It is
an optimization problem aiming at hybrid structures and
the optimization process is implemented in the integration
platform including ABAQUS and modeFRONTIER.
A. DESIGN VARIABLES
In the optimization process, the hybrid structures are opti-
mized by considering the design variables of the joint hous-
ings and links.
1) DESIGN VARIABLES OF JOINT HOUSING
As shown in Fig. 4(a), the ith joint housing is a part of the ith
hybrid structure. To connect with the CFRP link and install
the drivetrain, the joint housing is designed into two parts:
ALJH and CSJH as shown in Figs. 4(c) and (d). The CSJH
part is integrated with the CFRP link by forming in a steel
mold and also wrapped on the surface of the ALJH part. Thus,
the design variables of the joint housing consisting of the both
ALJH and CSJH parts are described as these corresponding
parameters of the ALJH and CSJH parts.
Using FEA in ABAQUS, the stress distribution pattern
of the second joint housing in AA prototype is obtained as
shown in Fig. 4(b). We can summarize that the maximum
stress occurs around the bolt holes and transitional area on
the xing ange. Consequently, the thickness tJiof the xing
ange is a signicant factor to inuence the strength of joint
housing and is selected as one design variable of joint housing
as shown in Fig. 4(c). In addition, the external radius RJiof the
ALJH part is optimized to reduce the weight of joint housing.
In the optimization design, the inside radius rAiand the axial
length Lciof the ALJH part are xed to match the structural
VOLUME 7, 2019 64935
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
FIGURE 4. (a) Model of joint housing, (b) stress pattern of joint housing
in AA prototype, (c) design variables of ALJH and (d) design variables of
CSJH.
dimensions of drivetrains, which are given and used in the
AA prototype. As a result, the design variables of the ALJH
parts are described asV
HA
JD
HA
J1;HA
J2
D 
RJ1;tJ1;RJ2;tJ2
; (2)
where HA
Jrepresents all design variables of the ALJH parts,
HA
J1andHA
J2denote the design variables of the ALJH parts
in the rst and second hybrid structures. Superscript Arepre-
sents AA component.
Figure 4(d) depicts the CSJH part, its inside radius RJi
is same with the external radius of the ALJH part due to
the connection relation. Additionally, the thickness tc
Jiof the
CSJH part is related with the each ply thickness tcand the
ply number NJi, and the each ply thickness tcis a xed
value that is dependent on the dimension of prepreg. Hence,
the ply number NJithat determines the thickness of the CSJH
part is taken into account as one design variable. Moreover,
it can be observed that i
Nis the Nth ply orientations in the
ith CSJH part, these ply orientations are termed as stacking
sequence or a vector Seq Ji. To balance the stack and obtain
excellent mechanics properties, the ply orientations in stack-
ing sequence are designed symmetrically, so the actual ply
number are double the independent ply number NJi. Since
the stacking sequence have an impact on the integral stiffness
and frequency of robotic arms, it is used as design variables
and expressed as Seq JiD
i
1=i
2=:::=i
N
s, where each
element is a specic ply angle and selected from the set {-
45, 0, 45, 90} due to the limitation on raw materials and
cost. The design variables of the CSJH parts are described
asV
HC
JD
HC
J1;HC
J2
D 
NJ1;SeqJ1;NJ2;SeqJ2
;(3)
where HC
Jrepresents all design variables of the CSJH parts,
HC
J1andHC
J2denote the design variables of the CSJH parts
in the rst and second hybrid structures. Superscript Crepre-
sents CFRP component.
As a result, the design variables of joint housings are
dened as a vector HJ, which can be represented byV
HJD.HJ1;HJ2/
D 
NJ1;SeqJ1;RJ1;tJ1;NJ2;SeqJ2;RJ2;tJ2
; (4)
FIGURE 5. (a) Hybrid structure model and (b) design variables of the
CFRP link.
where HJ1and HJ2denotes the design variables of
joint housings in the rst and second hybrid structures,
respectively.
2) DESIGN VARIABLES OF LINKS
As shown in Fig. 5(a), the CFRP link is a cylindrical
shell in the ith (iD1;2) hybrid structure. To compare
the kinematics performance of the proposed robotic arm
with the AA prototype, the lengths Liof the CFRP links
in the hybrid structures are the same values as the AA
counterpart determined in the previous optimization based
on GCI [32]. Similarly, the inner radius RLiof cylindri-
cal link is set as given value for connection with the ear
plate. Regarding the weight of the CFRP link, the thickness
tLiof cylindrical link, which is related to the ply number
MLiand each ply thickness tc, should be limited. Because
the ply thickness is constant due to the use of prepreg,
the thickness of cylindrical link is only dependent on the ply
number MLi.
Consequently, the design variables of the ith CFRP link are
described as ply number MLiand stacking sequence Seq LiD
i
1=i
2=:::=i
M
s, where the symbol i
Mdenotes the Mth ply
angle in the CFRP link of the ith hybrid structure, and the ply
angles are limited to select from the specic range { 45, 0,
45, 90}. All design variables of the both CFRP links can be
represented byV
HLD.HL1;HL2/D 
ML1;SeqL1;ML2;SeqL2
;(5)
where HL1andHL2denote the design variables of the CFRP
links in the rst and second hybrid structures, respectively.
In addition to the design variables of CFRP links, a charac-
teristic parameter related to the thickness and length of link,
is dened asV
DtLi
Li;iD1;2; (6)
If the value of the characteristic parameter is less
than 0.1, the CFRP links can be discretized into shell
element in nite element method to improve calculation
efciency.
64936 VOLUME 7, 2019
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
3) DESIGN VARIABLES OF HYBRID STRUCTURES
Consequently, the design variables of the hybrid structures in
the robotic arm are briey expressed asV
XD.X1;X2/
DML1;SeqL1;NJ1;SeqJ1;RJ1;tJ1;ML2;
SeqL2;NJ2;SeqJ2;RJ2;tJ2
; (7)
where X,X1andX2are the design variables of the both hybrid
structures, design variables of the rst and second hybrid
structure, respectively.
These design variables related to the kinematics and
dynamic behavior of robot are renewed in the entire design
process to obtain the optimal objective and meet the corre-
sponding constraint conditions.
B. CONSTRAINTS CONDITIONS
In the lightweight optimization of robotic arm with hybrid
structures, these constraints on strength, stiffness, and bond-
ing damage are supposed to be considered to validate the
computations.
1) CONSTRAINTS ON STRENGTH
The hybrid structures of robotic arm are composed of AA
parts and CFRP components; hence the optimization need
consider the corresponding strength conditions for different
material parts.
For AA parts, the Von-Mises equivalent stress of the ALJH
and ear plate are mainly considered to satisfy the constraints
on structural strength and represented byV
S1A.X/s; (8)
where Xis the design variables of hybrid structures, and A
andsdenote the maximum Von-Mises equivalent stress of
AA parts and the yield strength of AA material. The symbol
S1is the structural safety coefcient.
These constraints on structural strength are evaluated
through the static structural analysis in ABAQUS and
imported into modeFRONTIER to optimize the structural
parameters.
For CFRP parts, the internal stresses are simulated accord-
ing to the failure criteria, which is different from isotropic AA
material. Comparing with the maximum stress and maximum
strain criterions, the TsaiWu criterion [33] presents a concise
analytical expression in consideration of the strong coupling
effects among the stress components. To validate strength
analysis for CFRP parts under the action of load, the TsaiWu
failure criterion is used in strength analysis and described asV
CvDF11[1(X)]2C2F121(X) 2(X)CF22[2(X)]2
CF66[12(X)]2CF11(X)CF22(X)<Cvmax; (9)
where1and2are the normal stress related to the ber
orientation and transverse direction, and 12is shear stress;
CvandCvmaxare the Tsai-Wu failure index and its maximum
permissible value; the coefcients are described asV
F11D1
.XcXt/;F12D1
.XcXtYcY/1/2;F22D1
.YcYt/;F66D1.
S2;
F1D.Xc Xt/
.XcXt/;F2D.Yc Yt/
.YcYt/; (10)
where XcandXtrepresent the compression and tension failure
stress in ber orientation, YcandYtdenote compression and
tension failure stress in transverse direction, Sis the shear
failure stress.
When the value of Cvis not less than 1, the CFRP structure
is termed as failure. Until the value of Cvis smaller than 1,
the CFRP parts in the robotic arm are feasible.
2) CONSTRAINTS ON STIFFNESS
The robotic arm yields the deformation when its stiffness is
insufcient due to the lightweight design. Therefore, the con-
straints on stiffness reected by the deformation and fre-
quency are required to consider in optimization.
In the design, the maximum value of deformation at the
end-effector of the robotic arm is calculated and need meet
the following conditions asV
S2u.X/maxda; (11)
where u(X) maxis the maximum values of deformation at end-
effector of the robotic arm in three-dimension coordinates, da
is the allowable values of deformation at end-effector of the
robotic arm. The symbol S2is the stiffness safety coefcient.
In addition to the deformation constraints, the dynamic
frequency of the robotic arm should be considered in the
lightweight design. Thus, the natural frequency of the present
robotic arm is constrained to attain better dynamic character-
istics. In the optimization, the natural frequency is calculated
in ABAQUS and need meet the following conditionsV
v.X/f;
fDmaxfn j
60;jD1;2;3;4g; (12)
where v(X) is the rst natural frequency (FF) of the robotic
arm, and fis the maximum value of the excited frequencies
from four joint speeds (n j) of the robotic arm.
3) CONSTRAINTS ON BONDING DAMAGE
In the hybrid structures, the AA ear plates are bonded with
the CFRP link by using the bonding adhesive. The interfacial
behavior of adhesive layer is analyzed by using the CZM.
The fracture initiation of the adhesive layer is evaluated by
the quadratic stress criterion [34], which is widely applied in
adhesive joint and described asV
< n.X/>
nc2
Cs.X/
sc2
Ct.X/
tc2
D1; (13)
wheren,s,t, andnc,sc,tcdenote the normal stress,
in-plane shear stress, out-of-plane shear stress, and corre-
sponding critical values, respectively. The mathematic sym-
bol<> represents the Macauley operator as: <x>D
0:5(xCjxj).
When there is damage propagation in the adhesive layer,
a damage parameter D, which is represented by the damage
VOLUME 7, 2019 64937
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
FIGURE 6. Simulation results of the adhesive layer in hybrid structure.
stiffness of cohesive elements, is described asV
D(X)D8
>><
>>:0; mm0;
m1(m m0)
m(m1 m0);  m0< m< m1
1; mm1;(14)
wheremis an equivalent value of the strain in the adhesive
layer,m0andm1are the corresponding values at the begin
and end of fracture. The values 0 and 1 represent that the
cohesive layer is perfect and complete fracture. Between the
values 0 and 1, the strains and stresses can be described asV
2
4n
s
t3
5D2
64(1 D)K nnC< n>
 n0 0
0 (1 D)K ss 0
0 0 (1 D)K tt3
75
2
4n
s
t3
5; (15)
where Knn,KssandKttrepresent the damage stiffness in
normal and both tangential directions. n,sandtrepresent
the strains in normal and both tangential directions. The
equivalent value of the strain is described asV
mDq
.< n>/2C.s/2C(t)2:
As a result, the constraints on bonding damage for adhesive
zone are represented byV
D(X)<Df; (16)
where Dfis the maximum value of permissible damage
parameter with reliable connections.
In this study, the parameter Dthat is equal to the index
SDEG is evaluated in the ABAQUS software. For example,
a mesh model of adhesive layer in the second hybrid structure
is presented with the value of SDEG as shown in Fig. 6.
If the value of SDEG is less than 1, the adhesive layer is
undamaged.
C. OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
In this study, the objective of the optimization problem is to
design a lightweight robotic arm with CFRP/AA hybrid struc-
tures that fulll all constraint conditions on strength, stiffness
FIGURE 7. Flowchart of the hybrid structure optimization for the
lightweight robotic arm.
and bonding damage. The objective function is dened asV
Mininizeh(X )Dh1.X1/Ch2.X2/; (17)
where h1(X1) and h2(X2) is the mass of the rst and second
hybrid structure respectively, and h(X) denotes the total mass
of hybrid structures.
D. DESIGN PROCESS AND ALGORITHM
Figure 7 depicts the owchart of the hybrid structure opti-
mization for the lightweight robotic arm, which consists of
design of experiment (DOE), FEM analysis, data process and
renewal.
First, the initial conditions are presented and the initial
population (N p) related to the design variables are generated
by DOE, where each sample need fulll all constraint condi-
tions.
Second, the design variables of samples are imported
into ABAQUS and the parameterized models of the robotic
arms with hybrid structures are automatically established
to calculate the values of stress, stiffness, frequency and
mass of the hybrid structures by using a Python script lan-
guage in ABAQUS. According to the condition in Eq. (6),
CFRP links and CSJH are discretized into shell elements
in FEM analysis. While the adhesive layers are calculated
with cohesive elements and the other parts are modeled
with
64938 VOLUME 7, 2019
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
TABLE 3. Values of mechanical parameters of CFRP Material (unit: GPa).
solid elements. In addition, the whole robotic arm is
meshed with the size of 2.5 mm. The foundation bed of the
robotic arm is xed upon six degrees of freedom and the end
effector is subjected to a given load.
Third, every calculated result of samples are evaluated with
corresponding constraints to select the feasible individuals
and produce new individuals, which are used to generate a
new population by using NSGA-II in modeFRONTIER.
Finally, the second and third steps are calculated all over
again until the iteration number of calculation Ntexceed the
minimum iteration number at.
In conclusion, the whole optimization process is performed
on integrated platform with Python script in ABAQUS used to
static analysis and the genetic algorithm in modeFRONTIER.
After the optimization, a dynamic analysis for the optimized
robotic arm in MSC.ADAMS is conducted to validate the
energy conversation and driving ability.
IV. DESIGN EXAMPLE
A. MATERIAL PARAMETERS AND CALCULATION
CONDITIONS
To optimize the robotic arm, the material parameters are
necessary to be specied. The robotic arm with hybrid
structures is made of aluminum alloy (6061-T6) and car-
bon ber (T700/BA9916), and the mechanical parameters
of materials are assigned to evaluate the strength and stiff-
ness. The aluminum alloy is an isotropic material, and its
Young's modulus EAand yield strength sare assigned
to 69000 Mpa and 270 MPa, respectively. While carbon
ber is anisotropic material, so the elasticity modulus and
yield strength include various parameters and are listed
in Table 3.
Regarding the bonding adhesive, the critical stress are set
asncD60 MPa,scDtcD80 MPa, the initial damage
stiffness are given as KnnD2 GPa, KssDKttD1:5 GPa,
and the release rates of fracture energy are xed as GC
nD0:78
N/mm, GC
sDGC
tD1:36 N/mm, respectively. The damage
parameter of cohesive zone is DfD1 mm.
In addition, the Poisson's ratio of aluminum alloy and
bonding adhesive are xed as 0.32 and 0.33 respectively,
and the thickness tcof prepreg is given as 0.2 mm. The
density of aluminum alloy ( A) and CFRP ( c) materials are
2700 kg/m3and 1600 kg/m3, respectively. The structural andTABLE 4. Mapping relationship between numbers and ply angles.
stiffness safety coefcients are set to S1DS2D1:2, and the
maximum value of allowable deformation in three directions
is given as daD0:6 mm. The maximum value of Tsai-Wu
failure index Cvmaxis set to 1.
In the genetic algorithm, the initial population Np, which
is generated in modeFRONTIER by DOE based on a random
sequence, is given as 17 and the number of generation Ngis
set to 10. Hence, the minimum iteration number atshould
be 170.
B. INITIALIZATION OF DESIGN VARIABLES
Besides the material parameters and calculation conditions,
the initial values and feasible ranges of the design variables
are necessary. In particular, the stacking sequences repre-
sented by a group of ply angles are transformed into an inte-
ger variable to facilitate the programmable computation and
realize updating in optimization. The mapping relationship
between ply angles and numbers is listed in Table 4. Based
on the mapping relationship, the transformation formula of
the stacking sequences into integer variables are represented
byV
SeqJiDNJiX
jD14NJi ji
j;SeqLiDMLiX
jD14MLi ji
j;
i
j2[0;1;2;3];i
j2[0;1;2;3]; (18)
Four ply angles are used in the transformation and then
any stacking sequence can be transformed into a quaternary
number, which is an integer to simplify the description and
calculation.
In this design example, the initial values and ranges of the
design variables of CFRP/AA hybrid structures are described
and listed with data type and step-size as shown in Table 5.
All the starting values in these ranges are the initial val-
ues of the corresponding design variables. And then, initial
populations are produced to perform the genetic algorithm
based on the initial values and ranges of design variables in
modeFRONTIER.
C. OPTIMAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Based on these parameter values of materials used in
the hybrid structures and initialization of design variables,
the CFRP/AA hybrid structures in the robotic arm can be
achieved optimum solution.
Figures 8 and 9 illustrate the convergences of the design
variables of joint housing and link in the rst hybrid struc-
ture. In the convergences, these values of design variables,
which change within the given ranges and make the calcu-
lated results fulll all conditions, are retained and marked in
VOLUME 7, 2019 64939
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
TABLE 5. Initial values and ranges of design variables of hybrid
structures.
FIGURE 8. Convergences of design variables of joint housing in the first
hybrid structure: (a) RJ1and (b) tJ1.
TABLE 6. Optimal results of all design variables of the both hybrid
structures.
color points. The design variables RJ1andtJ1of ALJH are
convergent to the optimal results that are close to the smallest
values in the given ranges through about 100 iterations. The
other design variables can converge faster except that the
design variable NJ1converges to a stable value in the need
of 123 iterations.
Table 6 presents the optimal results of the design variables
of both hybrid structures. It can be observed that the stacking
sequences of all CFRP parts are solved in integers, which
can be transformed into quaternary sequences by means of
FIGURE 9. Convergences of design variables of CFRP link in the first
hybrid structure: (a) ML1and (b) SeqL1.
FIGURE 10. Convergences of weight of the hybrid structures: (a) hi(Xi)
and (b) h(X).
Hybrid structure 2Hybrid structure 1
FIGURE 11. Experimental prototype of the both hybrid structures.
Eq. (18). Therefore, the stacking sequences represented by
quaternary sequences can be mapped to the ply angles in
terms of the mapping relationship shown in Table 4. As a
result, the optimal results of the design variables Seq J1,
Seq J2,Seq L1andSeq L2listed in Table 6 are transformed into
the angular vectors [ 45/90/ 45/0/0], [ 45/90
/-45], [90/0/90/0] and [0/ 90/90/0], respectively.
In addition, the actual ply numbers are double the opti-
mal results of the design variables NJiandMLi, and are
represented by the numbers in brackets in Table 6. The ply
orientations of CFRP parts are designed symmetrically, so the
actual stacking sequences are described as [ 45/90/ 45
64940 VOLUME 7, 2019
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
FIGURE 12. (a) Experimental prototype of the lightweight CFRP/AA arm, (b) Experimental prototype of the lightweight AA arm, (c) EPOS-studio in PC, and
(d) schematic of torque measurement.
TABLE 7. Optimal results of mass of the hybrid structure in robotic arms
(unit: g).
/0/0]s, [ 45/90/-45]s, [90/0/90/0]sand [0/90/90
/ 0]s, respectively.
Figure 10 depicts the convergences of the weight of hybrid
structures. In Figure 10(a), the symbol hi(Xi) denotes the
mass of the ith hybrid structure. The convergence of the
weight of the second hybrid structure is faster than that of
the rst hybrid structure because the second hybrid structure
is a load on the rst hybrid structure and the former can
affect the latter, which is not completely dependent on the
former in calculation. Figure 10(b) shows the convergence
of the total weight of hybrid structures in the robotic arm.
The optimal results of the mass of hybrid structures are listed
in Table 7, and are compared with the corresponding values
of the counterpart in the AA prototype.
Table 7 shows that the hybrid structure design has a
reduction of 27.84% and 19.21% of the mass of mono-
lithic hybrid structure respectively, by comparing with the
AA structure design [31]. These results imply that the rst
hybrid structure has larger optimized space than the second
hybrid structure. As a result, the total mass of hybrid struc-
tures has a reduction of 24.32%, which is in between the
values of 27.84% and 19.21%, in comparison with the mass
of AA structures. Hence, the hybrid structure design of the
robotic arm can obtain a lighter structure, and a series of
experiment tests are performed on the prototype to validate
the hybrid structure design.
V. EXPERIMENT AND VERIFICATION
A. EXPERIMENTAL PROTOTYPE AND TRAJECTORIES
Figure 11 depicts the experimental prototypes of the both
hybrid structures, which are made of T700/BA9916 and
6016-T6 based on the optimal results. The total mass of
the experiment prototypes of the hybrid structure have areduction of 21.37%, in comparison with the total mass of
the prototypes of the AA structure. The result is close to the
abovementioned theoretical result 24.32% and show that the
hybrid structure design is relatively accurate.
To verify the validity of the optimization and the energy-
saving objective of the lightweight robotic arm, the robot
prototype with hybrid structures is made to compare with that
of the robot prototype made of AA structures.
In the comparison of dynamic characteristics, the tra-
jectories are necessary for calculation and measurement of
the torque. The robotic arm is conducted in four motions,
which result from two types of installations and two motions
for each installation. In the measurement and calculation,
the maximum required torque of the joint 1 occurs in the case
of wall installation, while the maximum required torques of
joints 24 occur in the case of ground installation. In addition
to the positions of trajectories listed in Table 2, the velocities
and accelerations of trajectories at starting and ending times
are assumed as zero for smooth motions.
B. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TORQUES
Based on the prototype of hybrid structures and other parts
used in the AA robotic arm, we can build an experimental pro-
totype of the lightweight robotic arm with hybrid structures.
Figure 12 shows the two versions experimental prototypes,
which perform the same control action for comparison, and
the measurement scheme of torques using the EPOS-studio in
PC. The torque values of joints are obtained by transforming
the current data, which are exported from the drivers of the
motors by using USB cables. The transformation formula is
represented byV
i(t)DKTiImi(t)ig; iD1;2;3;4; (19)
whereandigare the average efciency and reduction ratio
respectively, while Imi(t) and KTiare the measured current
values and torque constant respectively. And i(t) represents
the torque of the ith joint.
The torque constants of the four Maxon motors used in
the drivetrains are KT1DKT2D91 mNm/A, KT3D
30:5 mNm/A, and KT4D36:9 mNm/A. In this analysis,
the average efciency and reduction ratio igof drivetrains
VOLUME 7, 2019 64941
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
FIGURE 13. Experimental and theoretical results of torques for four joints.
are used as 0.76 and 120 according to the data from catalog
of motors and gears. The measured current values and its
root mean square (RMS) are transformed into experimentaltorques ( ) and the corresponding RMS (u d) for CFRP/AA
arm (blue lines) as shown in Fig. 13. In the measurement,
the experimental prototype tracks the same trajectories as the
64942 VOLUME 7, 2019
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
TABLE 8. Experimental RMS Of torques for the both versions prototypes
and comparison results (uint: N·m).
simulation, and the RMS of measured torques are 15.65 Nm,
18.09 Nm, 10.45 Nm, and 2.37 Nm, respectively, which are
used to compare with the analytical results. Figure 13 also
depicts the analytical torques and their RMS for CFRP/AA
arm (pink and green lines) in simulation, and the RMS of
calculated torques are 15.31 Nm, 19.02 Nm, 10.11 Nm,
and 2.299 Nm, respectively. It is observed that the errors
between the analytical and experimental RMS of torques are
 2.22%, 4.89%, 3.36%, and 3.09%, respectively. The
absolute values of errors are less than 5% and imply that the
calculation and optimization of the lightweight robotic arm
are relatively accurate.
All the theoretical and experimental RMS of torques are
less than the rated values of the selected components, which
are 21.342 Nm, 21.342 Nm, 11.674 Nm, and 2.462 Nm as
illustrated in Table 1. The comparisons imply that the design
method is valid and the experimental prototype is safe.
Moreover, the experimental RMS of torques of the
CFRP/AA prototype are compared with that of the AA pro-
totype, which are also depicted as black lines in Fig. 13.
Table 8 lists the experimental values of the both prototypes
and comparison results. The experimental RMS of all joints
torques of the CFRP/AA prototype are less than the cor-
responding value of the AA prototype, and the CFRP/AA
prototype has a reduction of 5.4%, 5.7%, 1.1%, and 0.4% of
experimental RMS for four joints, respectively. As a result,
the optimal prototype with CFRP/AA hybrid structures can
provide the operation with lower energy-consumption than
the optimal prototype with AA structures under the action of
the same working tasks.
1) EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON STIFFNESS CONDITIONS
In addition, the lightweight design makes the robotic arm
become exible, thus, the stiffness of the designed robotic
arms are necessary to check. To validate the stiffness condi-
tions in the design of robotic arms, a series of experiments on
modal frequency and deection measurement are achieved.
The lightweight design results in large deformation
of the robotic arm at end-effector. So the deections
at the end-effectors of the both versions robotic arms
are measured by using the ICP accelerometer (356A03)
and data-acquisition instrument (SEMENS LMS SCADAS)
shown in Fig. 14(a) and (b). The measuring schematic is
shown in Fig. 14(c) and the measured accelerations are trans-
formed into displacements through the LMS Test. Lab.
FIGURE 14. Experimental prototypes with accelerometer for (a) AA arm,
(b) CFRP/AA arm, and (c) schematic of deflection measurement.
FIGURE 15. Accelerations (A) and displacements (D) of deflections for
two versions arms in local frame {4}.
Figure 15(a) shows the accelerations of deections for the
both versions robotic arms in local coordinate frame {4},
which can be transformed into local displacements shown
in Fig. 15(b) by integral calculation. The local displacements
of deections are transformed into the corresponding global
values by using the following formulaV
0DD0T4(q)4D (20)
where0DD[0Dx;0Dy;0Dz] and4DD[4Dx,4Dy,
4Dz] are the global and local displacements of deections,
VOLUME 7, 2019 64943
H. Yin et al.: Hybrid Structure Design of Lightweight Robotic Arms Based on CFRP and AA
TABLE 9. Maximum global displacements of deflections for the both
CFRP/AA and AA prototypes.
TABLE 10. Modal frequencies of CFRP/AA and AA prototypes (unit: Hz).
respectively,0T4is the homogeneous transformation matrix,
andqis the vector of the joint trajectory.
The maximum displacements of deections in the global
coordinate frame {0} for the both CFRP/AA and AA robotic
arms are obtained and listed in Table 9. All the displacements
of deections in three directions are less than the allowable
value of deformation daD0:6 mm used in the optimization.
The results imply that the designed lightweight robotic arm
meets the stiffness requirements. Moreover, the maximum
vibrations displacements appear in z0direction, the result
reect the inuence of load. The CFRP/AA robotic arm has
a reduction of 22% of the maximum vibration displacement
inzodirection by comparing with the AA robotic arm. The
results imply that the CFRP/AA robotic arm possess larger
stiffness and higher positioning accuracy than the AA robotic
arm.
In addition, based on these data of vibration displacement
inzodirection, the frequency-domain spectra of the robot
prototypes are obtained by fast Fourier transformation (FFT).
The rst frequencies of the CFRP/AA prototype and the AA
prototype are listed in Table 10, and the rst frequency of
the CFRP/AA prototype increase 10.26% than that of the AA
prototype. As a result, the CFRP/AA robotic arm can provide
lower amplitude of vibration and higher natural frequency
than the AA prototype.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
A hybrid structure design was proposed to optimize
lightweight robotic arms. In this method, the CFRP and AA
materials were used to build composite components, which
replace the upper arm and forearm in the previously designed
AA robotic arm. The CFRP and AA material modules were
simultaneously optimized to obtain the optimal conguration
under specic structure strength and dynamic performance
constraints by using NSGA-II algorithm. Thus, the hybrid
structure design has a reduction of 24.32% of the total mass
of the both arms by comparing with the AA structure design.
On the basis of the optimal results, the robotic arm with
hybrid structure prototype was built and three experimentson joint torques, deections and frequency of the designed
robotic arm were implemented to validate the optimiza-
tion. Comparing with that of the AA prototype, the maxi-
mum reduction rate of joint torque was 5.7%, the vibration
displacements of deections at end-effector reduced 22%
and the rst natural frequency of the CFRP/AA prototype
increased up to 19.88 Hz. Those analysis results imply that
the robotic arm with hybrid structures can provide lower
energy consumption, higher motion precision, and better
dynamic performance than the AA prototype.
The hybrid structure design can improve lightweight and
energy saving level, and dynamic performance for the robotic
arms, which are used in service industry. However, the design
variables of stacking sequences were searched in limited
values, therefore, the winding process and its reliability in
joint housing due to the heat inuence from drivetrains will
be part of our further research.
