Innovative Design Research on  a Cable-Driven 
Humanoid Robotic Arm  
Zhiyuan Wu  
1.State Key Laboratory of
Tribology,  Department of
Mechanical Engineering,
Tsinghua University  
2.Beijing Key Lab of
Precision/Ultra -precision 
Manufacturing Equipment  and 
Control, Department of 
Mechanical Engineering, 
Tsinghua University  
Beijing , China  
zy-wu20@mails.tsinghua.edu.c n Ye Huo 
1.State Key Laboratory of
Tribology,  Department of
Mechanical Engineering,
Tsinghua University  
2.Beijing Key Lab of
Precision/Ultra -precision 
Manufacturing Equipment  and 
Control, Department of 
Mechanical Engineering, 
Tsinghua University  
Beijing , China  
huoy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn  Kangji Ma  
1.State Key Laboratory of
Tribology,  Department of
Mechanical Engineering,
Tsinghua University  
2.Beijing Key Lab of
Precision/Ultra -precision 
Manufacturing Equipment  and 
Control, Department of 
Mechanical En gineering, 
Tsinghua University  
Beijing , China  
mkj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn  Yuanzeng  Song 
1.Northwestern Polytechnical
University , Shaanxi , China
2.Commercial Aircraft
Corporation of China Ltd , 
Shanghai, China  
songyuanzeng@comac.cc  
Haiyan Sun  
1.Chengdu -Chongqin Economic
Circle ( Luzhou)  Advanced
Technology Research Institute
Luzhou, Sichuan , China  
13811769703@139.com  Huaizhi  Cao 
1.Chengdu -Chongqin Economic
Circle ( Luzhou)  Advanced
Technology Research Institute  
Luzhou, Sichuan , China  
13811769703@139.com  Zhufeng Shao*  
1.State Key Laboratory of
Tribology,  Department of
Mechanical Engineering,
Tsinghua University  
2.Beijing Key Lab of
Precision/Ultra -precision 
Manufacturing Equipment  and 
Control, Department of 
Mechanical Engineering, 
Tsinghua University  
Beijing , China  
shaozf@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn  
Abstract—The humanoid robotic arm aims to achieve multi -
dimensional comprehensive similarity with the human arm in 
kinematics, dynamics, and physiological structure, in order to 
enhance human -robot collaboration capabilities and skill learning 
efficiency, and to realize the in -situ replacement of manual 
operations, holding broad application prospects. In response to the 
demands of human -robot interaction and unstructured 
environment perception, this paper, based on the analysis of the 
human skeletal structure and muscle driving characteristics, and 
conside ring the enveloping effect of ligaments and driving muscles 
on human joints, proposes a joint configuration driven by cables 
arranged along a spherical surface, completing the configuration 
design of the cable -driven humanoid robotic arm. Using spherical 
projection, the kinematic modeling of each joint of the cable -
driven humanoid robotic arm is completed, and the kinematic 
performance, including workspace, is verified. The shoulder joint 
can achieve an inclination angle of at least 108°  in any direction, 
with a spin angle range of at least 180° ; the elbow joint has a 
movable range of 133° ; the wrist joint can achieve an inclination 
angle of at least 49.5°  in any direction, with a spin angle range of 
at least 180° , which is similar to the workspace of the hu man arm.  
Keywords —Humanoid Robotic Arm, Parallel Mechanism, 
Mechanical Design,  Kinematics . I.INTRODUCTION 
With the development of modern industry, robotic arms have 
been widely used in multiple fields. Humanoid robotic arms, 
with their similarities to human  arms, have shown high 
interactive performance with humans and are highly favored in 
fields that require intense human in teraction, such as healthcare 
[1][2][3], human -robot interaction [4][5], and entertainment 
[6][7 ]. 
The human arm has a total of seven d egrees of freedom: 
three at the shoulder joint, with ranges of approximately 190°  to 
200°  for flexion and extension, as well as abduction and 
adduction, and approximately 90°  to 120°  for external and 
internal rotation; one at the elbow joint, with a range of about 
130°  to 140° ; one in the forearm, with a range of about 160°  to 
180° ; and two at the wrist joint, with a range of about 140°  for 
flexion and extension, and about 40°  to 50°  for abduction and 
adduction . The human arm possesses characteristics such as 
high degrees of freedom, low inertia, large workspace, and high 
dynamic capabilities. Therefore, the driving and transmission 
scheme of humanoid robotic arms is very important. Cable -
driven systems have natural advantages in terms of 
miniaturization, li ghtness, flexibility, and precision [ 8], and they 
share a high similarity with human tendons in terms of force and 
428
979-8-3503-5030-2/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE2024 9th International Conference on Automation, Control and Robotics Engineering (CACRE) | 979-8-3503-5030-2/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CACRE62362.2024.10635090

motion transmission, promising to achieve driving mechanisms 
and kinematics sim ilar to humans, significantly improving the 
overall performance of humanoid robotic arms.  
In the existing joint designs of cable -driven humanoid 
robotic arms, the design direction can be broadly classified into 
two categories. One category seeks similarity  with the human 
arm in terms of skeletal structure and driving mechanism, 
imitating the human skeletal structure to design the basic 
configuration of the robotic arm, and treating cables as human 
muscles, imitating the arrangement of hu man muscles for cabl e 
layout [ 9][10][11 ]. Due to the redundancy and complexity of 
human muscles, such designs often cannot perfectly replicate the 
arrangement of human muscles, leading to deficiencies in 
workspace and dynamic characteristics. These designs usually 
have relati vely simple configuration designs and do not have the 
conditions for complex cable layout, and since human muscles 
are mostly driven by direct traction, such designs typically use a 
direct pull cable configuration. However, direct pull cables have 
a larger  dynamic volume and require avoiding interference 
between cables and between cables and mechanisms [ 12], 
especially in the design of the shoulder joint, which is difficult 
to achieve a workspace similar to that of the human body due to 
its large working sp ace. 
The other category treats cables as a medium for 
transmission, designing parallel or serial rotating joints with the 
same degrees of freedom as the human body 
[13][14][15][16][17][18]. These designs do not strictly imitate 
the human physiological structure and, through optimization of 
the mechanical structure and cable layout, can significantly 
improve their load -bearing capacity, dynamic characteristics, 
and stiffness, achieving a workspace similar to that of the human 
body. However, these designs  are usually complex and do not 
possess kinematic principles and driving mechanisms similar to 
the human body.  
Therefore, how to balance a simple structural design, large 
workspace, and kinematics and driving mechanisms similar to 
the human body is one of the research issues of humanoid 
robotic arms.  
This study will design the mechanical structure of a cable -
driven humanoid robotic arm based on the structure of the 
human arm, conduct dynamic modeling  and workspace analysis, 
and achieve a workspace and driving mechanism similar to that 
of the human arm.  II.DESIGN OF CABLE -DRIVEN HUMANOID ROBOTIC ARM
The overall configuration of the designed robotic arm is 
shown in Fig. 1. 
A.Shoulder Joint Design
In order to  increase the range of motion of the shoulder joint,
a double -layer joint with single cable constraints is designed, 
mimicking the way human ligaments envelop the joint. It 
consists of three parts: the outer layer, the middle layer, and the 
inner layer (Fi g. 2), which come into contact through spherical 
sliding. The middle and outer layers each have four equidistantly 
distributed cable h oles through which a closed cable  loop passes 
one by one, forming a constraint structure. Under the conditions 
of sufficie nt lubrication and tensioned cables, the linear shape of 
each segment of the cable can be considered as a circular arc 
passing through the center of the sphere, and its geometric 
configuration can be simplified as shown in Fig . 3. Here, α and 
β represent t he wrap angle parameters of the middle and outer 
layers, respectively, with the spherical radius being r. 
When the middle layer rotates around a vector 
OM
  with an 
angle θ to the x-axis in the x-y plane, the length of each segment 
of the cable changes. Taking  
11AB as an example, after rotation,
we obtain  

'
11OA OA
T 
where  Fig. 2. The Single -Cable -Constrained Double -Layer J oint  
Fig. 3. The G eometric Configuration  of the Single -Cable -Constrained 
Double -Layer J oint  
Fig. 1. The Overall C onfiguration of the Robotic A rm 
429

2cos (1 cos ) cos (1 cos ) cos sin sin sin
2(1 cos ) cos sin cos (1 cos ) sin sin cos
sin sin sin cos cos       
       
      
    


T
 
and 

 0 ,90 0,         ， 
thus 

'
' 11
11'
11arccosOA OBA B r
OA OB

  
The total length S of the cable  loop can be obtained b y summing 
up the arc s. Taking the relative length  

SLr  
The change in relative length is defined as  

max min
maxLLLL  As shown in Fig . 4, when α is large and β is small, 
L  gets 
small. To expand  the motion range of the joint, we take 
135
, 
77 . Here  the change is only 0.83%, which can 
be approximately considered as the middle layer sliding 
spherically with the outer layer.  
To prevent interference between the direct pull cables and 
the mechanism during extensive joint movements, and in 
reference to th e way muscles envelop the joints in the human 
body, the cables are routed along a spherical surface. This 
arrangement expands the range of motion of the joint, reduces 
the overall volume of the joint, and decreases the likelihood of 
interference.   
For the middle layer of the shoulder joint, four cables are 
used to pull along the surface of the middle layer of the shoulder 
joint. For the inner layer of the shoulder joint, four cables are 
used to pull along the surface where the inner layer meets the 
middle l ayer (Fig . 5), with the cables fixed and wrapped around 
the main shaft, passing through holes located at the edge of the 
middle layer's outer surface, and reaching the outer layer. The 
middle layer and inner layer have two and three rotational 
degrees of f reedom, respectively.  
B.Elbow  Joint Design
The muscles on the dorsal side of the elbow joint envelop the
joint, while the ventral muscles are more biased towards direct 
traction. Referring to the layout of the muscles in the human 
elbow joint, the basic configuration and driving of the  elbow Fig. 4. The Change in Relative L ength   
Fig. 5. The Actuation of the Shoulder J oint  
Fig. 6. The Actuation of the Elbow J oint  
Fig. 7. The Actuation of the Elbow J oint  
430
joint are designed (Fig . 6). This joint has one degree of rotational 
freedom, where the ventral cable wraps around a pulley located 
on the upper arm and is connected to the forearm, while the 
dorsal cable is guided th rough a fixed pulley and  passes through 
a moving pulley . 
C.Wrist  Joint Design
The human forearm has one degree of freedom of spin, and
the wrist joint has two degrees of freedom of rotation. In order 
to simplify the design and reuse the control scheme, the degree 
of freedom of the forearm is incorporated into the wrist joint, 
adopting a design approach similar to that of the inner layer of 
the shoulder joint. The basic configuration of the wrist joint is 
similar to that of the inner layer of the shoulder joi nt (Fig . 7), 
driven by four cables, which are fixed and wrapped around the 
main shaft, coated on the spherical surface, and pass through the 
points on the shell.  
III.JOINT KINEMATIC MODELING AND WORKSPACE ANALYSIS
A.Shoulder Joint
The cable -driven layout of the middle layer of the shoulder
joint can be simplified as shown in Fig . 8. Point 
1A is 
transformed into point 
'
1A after rotation. Taking  
11AC as an 
example, there is  

'
11
11'
11arccosOA OCAC r
OA OC

  By the same reasoning, the lengths of the other three cables can 
be obtained.  
The layout and top view of the inner layer cable drive of the 
shoulder joint can be simplified as show n in Fig.  9, with three 
degrees of rotational freedom, where points E are point s of 
tangency between the cable and the main shaft. For ease of 
control, a motion description method similar to the middle layer 
is adopt ed: first, rotate by an angle 
  around a vector  
'OM
 that 
is at an angle  
 to the x-axis in the  
xy  plane, and then rotate 
by an angle  
 around the axis of the main shaft after rotation. 
Taking 
1 1 1B D E  as an example, it consists of two parts, one 
located on the surface of the middle layer and the other on the 
surface of the inner layer.  
11BD
is the part that adapts to the changes in the rotation of 
the middle layer, and the solution method is the same as in ( 7). 
For the discussion of the cables on the inner layer surface, a 
similar concept to the polar coordinate system is used, with 
1D
being the ‘origin’  and 
1DF being the ‘ polar radius’. The motion 
of the main shaft is decomposed into distance and angle 
movements. The distance movement is the change in the length 
of  , which leads to a change in the length of the tangent arc and 
the change in the wrapping angle of the cable around the main 
shaft's circle due to the movement of the tangent point. The 
angle movement is the rotation of the main shaft circle relative 
to , which leads to a change in th e wrapping angle of the cable 
around the main shaft's circle.  
Calculate the change caused by the distance movement. 
Taking point 
1D as the South Pole, perform a stereographic
projection on the inner layer surface, projecting the mai n shaft 
circle and 
11DE onto a two -dimensional plane  (Fig. 10 ). 
According to the nature of spherical polar projection, their 
projections on the plane form a line tangent to a circle.  The 
coordinates of point F after rotation are  

[0,0,1]TOF r  
T 
The central angle opposite to 
1DF is Fig. 8. The Actuation of the Elbow J oint  
Fig. 9. The Actuation of the Shoulder Joint   
Fig. 10. The Stereographic Projection of the Inner Layer Surface   
431

1
1
1arccosOD OFD OF
OD OF

  
Taking the 
xz  section as shown in Fig . 11, 
12LL and
12JJ
are the diameter of the main shaft circle and its projection,
respectively.  
Since the central angle opposite to the same arc is twi ce the 
circumferential angle, we have  

111
2D KF D OF   
1 2 111arcsin22zrL KF L KF L OFr    

Thus, the diameter of the projection circle is  

'
1 2 2 1 1 1 2 [tan( ) tan( )] J J r L KF D KF D KF L KF     
 
The distance from the center of the projection circle to point  is  

'
1 2 1 1 1 [tan( ) tan( )] JD r L KF D KF D KF L KF     
 
Therefore, the length of the projection tangent 
'
1ED is 
' 2 2
1 1 1 21
4E D JD J J 
Thus, the central angle opposite to the arc 
11DE is 

'
' 1
1 1 1 2 2arctan2EDD OE D KEr    
And t he length of 
11DE is 

1 1 1 1 D E r D OE  
Simultaneously with the change in the length of 
1DF , the
position of the tangent point 
1E and
'E on the circle also
changes, causing a change in the wrapping angle of the cable. 
For the spherical triangle 
11D E F
 ( Fig. 12 ), there exists the sine 
theorem: 

1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1sin sin sin
sin sin sinD E F D FE FD E
D OF D OE FOE     
Thus, we have 

11
1 1 1 1
1sinarcsin(sin )sinD E FD FE D OED OF    
where 
1D OF and
11D OE are given by ( 9) and ( 15),
respectively. Since 
11DE and the main shaft circle are tangent,
11D E F
forms a right angle.
Due to the fact that in practical motion control, only the 
change in cable length needs to be concerned, the change in 
cable length caused by the distance movement can be 
represented as  

1 1 1 1 1 dL D E r D FE   
For the change in cable length caused by the angle 
movement, take point F as the North Pole and project 
1D
upwards from the South Pole point, as shown in Fig . 13. Fig. 11. The 
xz  Section
Fig. 13. The Upward Stereographic P rojection  
 Fig. 12. The Upward Stereographic P rojection  
432
Accord ing to the properties of spherical polar projection, it is 
known that  

''
1PFD P FD   
Using the inner layer as the reference frame, the coordinates 
of 
1D after rotation are 

''
11OD OD
T 
Let 

'
1[ , , ]T
D D D OD x y z
 
Then the coordinates of the projection of point 
1D on the plane 
are  

'22[ , ]T DD
DDrx ryFDr z r z
  
Thus  

''
''
''arccosFP FDP FD
FP FD

  
Considering the angle  
 of rotation of the main shaft around 
its own axis, the change in cable length caused by the angle 
movement can be represented as  

''
1 ()azL r P FD    
In summary, the length of the cable for section 
1 1 1B D E
can be expressed as  

'
1 1 1 1 1 da L B D L L   
By the same reasoning, the lengths of the other three cables 
on the inner layer can be obtained.  
If the motion of the joint is described as "first rotating around 
a vector  
OM
  in the 
xy  plane that is inclined at an angle 
  
to the x -axis by an angle 
 , and then rotating around the axis of 
the rotated main shaft by an angle 
 ", then for the human 
shoulder joint , 
 can exceed 90°  for almost any 
 0 ,360   .
In this design  the theoretical upper limit of  
 depends only on 
the number of turns of the cable. For the middle layer of the 
shoulder joint, for any 
 0 ,360   , there is

max 58middle      For the inner layer of the shoulder joint, except for the two 
narrow regions between 
12DD , 
34DD and the circle 
1 2 3 4D D D D  
 (Fig. 14), all above the circle is reachable by 
the main shaft circle.  
P is the midpoint of 
12DD , and its  inclination angle is  

arctanP
P
Py
z  
By adjusting the coordinates of point s D, we can obtain 
70P
, so for the inner layer of the shoulder joint, 
max [70 ,77 ]inner  
At the same time, taking the central angle of the main shaft 
radius as 20° , the overall maximum inclination angle of the 
shoulder joint  

max max max ( 20 ) [108 ,115 ]inner middle          
which can achieve a motion range similar to that of the human 
shoulder joint.  
B.Elbow Joint
The cable -driven layout of the elbow joint can be simplified
to the geometric configuration shown in Fig . 15. When the 
elbow joint rotates, point B rotates to point
'B . Since, in practical
motion control, only the change in cable length needs to be 
considered, considering the wrap angle of the pulley, the length 
of the ventral cable can be expressed as 

' ' '()A ventralL B D r B AX B AD     
For the dorsal cable, due to the presence of the movable 
pulley, its cable travel needs to be doubled:  Fig. 14. The W orkspace of the Shoulder  Joint Inner Layer 
Fig. 15. The Geometric C onfig uration of the Elbow Joint  
433

2dorsal ELr  
Taking the coordinates of  A (-80, 30) and B (60, 30), we have 

arccos 133EA EBAEB
EA EB   

  
This can achieve a motion range similar to that of the human 
elbow joint.  
C.Wrist  Joint
The method for specifying the motion pattern and kinematic
modeling of the wrist joint is consistent with that of the inner 
layer of the shoulder joint, with only the parameters changing. 
By adjusting the parameters, the maximum inclination angle of 
the wr ist joint can be obtained  

max [49.5 ,59.5 ]   
This is not entirely consistent with the motion range of the 
human wrist joint, but it can meet practical needs in most cases.  
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, referring to the enveloping effect of human  
ligaments and muscles on joints, a cable -driven humanoid 
robotic arm with a workspace similar to the human body and a 
similar driving mechanism is designed, and kinematic modeling 
of its joints is carried out. The main innovations of this paper are 
as fol lows:  
A single -cable -constrained double -layer spherical hinge is 
proposed, which has the characteristics of a large range of 
motion and being not easily disengaged; a four-cable three -
degree -of-freedom mechanism driving along the spherical 
surface is propo sed, which features a large workspace, compact 
size, and low interference.  
